Rewrite json.md (#801)
Dyalog/documentation: language-reference-guide/docs/system-functions/json.md

<h1 class="heading"><span class="name">JSON Convert</span> <span class="command">R←{X}⎕JSON Y</span></h1>

!!! Warning "Warning"
    The default for `X` depends on the type of `Y`. Dyalog Ltd strongly recommends that `X` should always be specified to avoid code that seemingly works, only to fail on specific values.

> This function imports and exports data in [JavaScript Object Notation](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) (JSON) data interchange format.

Reviewer: This is not needed - it is stated almost immediately below, and leading with it like this is just alarmist.

- JSON includes Boolean values `true` and `false` which are distinct from numeric values `1` and `0` and have no direct APL equivalent.
- JSON object members are named and these names might not be valid names in APL.
- The [JSON5](https://json5.org/) standard includes numeric constants `Infinity`, `-Infinity`, and `NaN`, which have no direct APL equivalent.

These differences are catered for in various ways as discussed below.

If specified, `X` must be a numeric scalar with the value `0` (import JSON) or `1` (export JSON). Dyalog Ltd strongly recommends that `X` should always be specified, however, if `X` is not specified and `Y` is a character array, `X` is assumed to be `0` (import); otherwise it is assumed to be `1` (export).

!!! Hint "Hints and Recommendations"
    As a mnemonic, think of `X` as specifying the desired "JSON-ness": `0` means "no JSON", that is, converting away from JSON; `1` means "yes JSON", that is, converting towards JSON.

`⎕JSON` has six [variant options](#variant-options): `Format`, `Compact`, `Null`, `HighRank`, `Charset`, and `Dialect`, specified using [`⍠`](../primitive-operators/variant.md). The principal option is `Format`.

## JSON Import

> If `X` is `0`, the JSON document `Y` is converted to a corresponding APL array or namespace `R`.

Reviewer: Is "document" the right term here? We use that term for the argument to ⎕R and ⎕S, but that is not the same.

Is "array or namespace" correct here? Elsewhere we refer to this as "data", and the different terms is confusing.  At least use "data" in the sentence too - e.g. "array or namespace (data)"

`Y` is a character scalar, vector, or matrix in JSON format. There is an implied newline character between each row of a matrix. By default, `R` is an APL array or namespace, possibly containing arrays and sub-namespaces. With [`Format`](#variant-option-format) being `'M'`, `R` is instead a matrix that represents the JSON structure.

The [JSON standard says](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259/#section-4) that members of a JSON object should have unique names and that implementations vary in how they treat duplicates. Dyalog does not error on duplicates, but their handling depends on the `Format` variant.

<h3 class="example">Example</h3>

```apl
      0 ⎕JSON'[1,2,3]'
1 2 3
```

For details and more examples, see [Import to Data](#import-to-data) and [Import to Matrix](#import-to-matrix).

## JSON Export

> If `X` is `1`, the APL array or namespace `Y` is converted to a corresponding JSON document `R`.

Reviewer: Ditto "document" and "data".

`Y` is the data to be exported. By default, `Y` must be an array or namespace that can be represented as JSON (subject to the [`HighRank`](#variant-option-highrank) option). With [`Format`](#variant-option-format) being `'M'`, `Y` must instead be a matrix representation such as would have been produced by JSON Import with `Format` being `'M'`. `⎕JSON` will signal `DOMAIN ERROR` if `Y` is incompatible with the specified (or implied) value of `Format`.

`R` is a character vector whose content depends upon the values of the [`Compact`](#variant-option-compact), [`Dialect`](#variant-option-dialect), and [`Charset`](#variant-option-charset) variants.

Some JSON values lack a direct APL equivalent (`true`, `false`, `null`, JavaScript fragments), and some APL representations of datasets do not map directly to JSON. Such cases are handled by [wrappers](#wrappers).

<h3 class="example">Example</h3>

```apl
      1 ⎕JSON 1 2 3
[1,2,3]
```

For details and more examples, see [Export from Data](#export-from-data) and [Export from Matrix](#export-from-matrix).

## Name Mangling

> When Dyalog imports from JSON to APL data, and a member of a JSON object has a name which is not a valid APL name, the member is renamed using a name mangling algorithm, resulting in a name that begins with `⍙`. Any characters that cannot be part of an APL name are replaced with their decimal Unicode code point surrounded by `⍙`s.

Reviewer: The previous text just had "resulting in a name that begins with ⍙". The addition is pretty much self-evident and seems like an unnecessary distraction.

|_-                                        -_| `'ASCII'`                             |_-                                                   -_| Non-ASCII characters are converted to the hexadecimal form `\uNNNN`, and if `Dialect` is `'JSON5'`, also `\xNN` |
| [**`HighRank`**](#variant-option-highrank) | `'Error'`<br><small>default</small>   | None                                                  | High-rank arrays are rejected |
|_-                                        -_| `'Split'`                             |_-                                                   -_| High-rank arrays are split and [inverted table wrappers](#dataset-wrappers) accept text columns as matrices |

### Variant Option: Format

The `Format` variant option, the principal option, determines whether `⎕JSON` works with a direct APL representation of the data (`'D'` for "Data", the default) or with a four-column matrix that encodes the JSON structure (`'M'` for "Matrix") as nodes with depth, name, value, and type.

#### Import to Data

> If `Format` is `'D'` (which stands for "Data", the default) the JSON document in `Y` is converted to the corresponding APL data `R` which is an array or a namespace, possibly containing arrays and/or sub-namespaces.

Reviewer: Repeats meaning of 'D'

> If `Format` is `'D'` (which stands for "Data", the default) the JSON document in `Y` is converted to the corresponding APL data `R` which is an array or a namespace, possibly containing arrays and/or sub-namespaces.

Reviewer: Why not sub-arrays?

'[1, [2, 3]]'

has got sub-arrays.

<h1 class="heading"><span class="name">JSON Convert</span> <span class="command">R←{X}⎕JSON Y</span></h1>

> 

Reviewer 2: It's not ideal, but throughout the rest of this document variant option are presented in bold text and not in APL font. They should all be in APL font, and I will raise an issue about this. However, to be consistent with the rest of the documentation this should follow the same style as the rest of the document set and then they can all be amended as the same time.

I have not made this change in any of my individual comments – my hope is that we will have the capacity to update all the other references rather than change these ones onyl to need to change them back again later!

This function imports and exports data in [JavaScript Object Notation](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) (JSON) data interchange format.

> <h3 class="example">Examples</h3>

Reviewer 2: I don't think this should be here; I suggest moving it into the "Syntax" section that follows either before or after the Hint admonition. Alternatively, delete it – these examples are included in the "JSON Import" and "JSON Export" sections that follow soon after this.

Importing a JSON document to APL:
```apl
      0 ⎕JSON'[1,-2,3]'

> 1 ¯2 3

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- JSON object members are named, and these names might not be [valid names in APL](../../programming-reference-guide/introduction/names/).
```

```
Exporting APL data to JSON:
```apl
      1 ⎕JSON 1 ¯2 3
[1,-2,3]
```
## Syntax

If `X` is specified (that is, `⎕JSON` is called dyadically), it must be a numeric scalar with the value `0` for import or `1` for export.

!!! Hint "Hints and Recommendations"
    As a mnemonic, think of `X` as specifying the desired "JSON-ness": `0` means "no JSON", that is, converting away from JSON; `1` means "yes JSON", that is, converting towards JSON.

If `X` is not specified (that is, `⎕JSON` is called monadically), its assumed value depends on `Y`:  If `Y` is a character array, `X` is assumed to be `0`; otherwise it is assumed to be `1`.

!!! Warning "Warning"
    Dyalog Ltd strongly recommends that `X` should always be specified to avoid code that seemingly works, only to fail on specific values.

> `⎕JSON` has six [variant options](#variant-options): `Format`, `Compact`, `Null`, `HighRank`, `Charset`, and `Dialect`, specified using [`⍠`](../primitive-operators/variant.md). The principal option is `Format`.

Reviewer 2: I assume that adding the six individual sub-section links to the individual variant options looks like link overload, hence why you have not done it!

Author: Indeed.

## Limitations

> JSON supports a limited number of data types and there is not a direct correspondence between JSON and APL data structures. In particular:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JSON supports a limited number of data types, and there is no direct correspondence between JSON and APL data structures. In particular:
```

- JSON does not support arrays with rank &gt; 1.
- JSON does not support nested scalars.

> - JSON includes Boolean values `true` and `false` which are distinct from numeric values `1` and `0` and have no direct APL equivalent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- JSON includes Boolean values <code class="language-nonAPL">true</code> and <code class="language-nonAPL">false</code> which are distinct from numeric values <code class="language-nonAPL">1</code> and <code class="language-nonAPL">0</code>; these have no direct APL equivalent.
```

- JSON object members are named and these names might not be valid names in APL.

> - The [JSON5](https://json5.org/) dialect includes numeric constants `Infinity`, `-Infinity`, and `NaN`, which have no direct APL equivalent.

Reviewer 2: The [JSON5](https://json5.org/) dialect includes numeric constants <code class="language-nonAPL">Infinity</code>, <code class="language-nonAPL">-Infinity</code>, and <code class="language-nonAPL">NaN</code>, which have no direct APL equivalent.

These differences are catered for in various ways as discussed below.

## JSON Import

If `X` is `0`, the JSON document `Y` is converted to the corresponding APL data `R`.

> `Y` is a character scalar, vector, or matrix in JSON format. There is an implied newline character between each row of a matrix. By default, `R` is APL data, possibly containing sub-arrays and/or sub-namespaces. With [`Format`](#variant-option-format) being `'M'`, `R` is instead a matrix that represents the JSON structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Y` is a character scalar, vector, or matrix in JSON format. There is an implied newline character between each row of a matrix.

By default, `R` is APL data, possibly containing sub-arrays and/or sub-namespaces. If the variant option [`Format`](#variant-option-format) is set to `'M'`, `R` is instead a matrix that represents the JSON structure.
```

> The [JSON standard says](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259/#section-4) that members of a JSON object should have unique names and that implementations vary in how they treat duplicates. Dyalog does not error on duplicates, but their handling depends on the `Format` variant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [JSON standard](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259/#section-4) states that members of a JSON object should have unique names and that implementations vary in how they treat duplicates. Dyalog does not error on duplicates, but their handling depends on the `Format` variant option.
```

<h3 class="example">Example</h3>

```apl
      0 ⎕JSON'[1,-2,3]'
1 ¯2 3
```

For details and more examples, see [Import to Data](#import-to-data) and [Import to Matrix](#import-to-matrix).

## JSON Export

If `X` is `1`, the APL data `Y` is converted to a corresponding JSON document `R`.

> `Y` is the data to be exported. By default, `Y` must be APL data that can be represented as JSON (subject to the [`HighRank`](#variant-option-highrank) option). With [`Format`](#variant-option-format) being `'M'`, `Y` must instead be a matrix representation such as would have been produced by importing JSON with `Format` being `'M'`. `⎕JSON` will signal `DOMAIN ERROR` if `Y` is incompatible with the specified (or implied) value of `Format`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Y` is the data to be exported. By default, `Y` must be APL data that can be represented as JSON (subject to the [`HighRank`](#variant-option-highrank) variant option). If the [`Format`](#variant-option-format) variant option is set to `'M'`, `Y` must instead be a matrix representation such as would have been produced by importing JSON with `Format` being `'M'`. `⎕JSON` will signal `DOMAIN ERROR` if `Y` is incompatible with the specified (or implied) value of `Format`.
```

> `R` is a character vector whose content depends upon the values of the [`Compact`](#variant-option-compact), [`Dialect`](#variant-option-dialect), and [`Charset`](#variant-option-charset) variants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`R` is a character vector whose content depends upon the values of the [`Compact`](#variant-option-compact), [`Dialect`](#variant-option-dialect), and [`Charset`](#variant-option-charset) variant options.
```

> Some JSON values lack a direct APL equivalent (`true`, `false`, `null`, JavaScript fragments), and some APL representations of datasets do not map directly to JSON. Such cases are handled by [wrappers](#wrappers).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some JSON values lack a direct APL equivalent (<code class="language-nonAPL">true</code>, <code class="language-nonAPL">false</code>, <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code>, JavaScript fragments), and some APL representations of datasets do not map directly to JSON. Such cases are handled by [wrappers](#wrappers).
```

<h3 class="example">Example</h3>

```apl
      1 ⎕JSON 1 ¯2 3
[1,-2,3]
```

For details and more examples, see [Export from Data](#export-from-data) and [Export from Matrix](#export-from-matrix).

## Name Mangling

> When `⎕JSON` converts a JSON document to APL data, and a member of a JSON object has a name which is not a valid APL name, the member is renamed using a name mangling algorithm, resulting in a name that begins with `⍙`. Any characters that cannot be part of an APL name are replaced with their [decimal Unicode code point](ucs.md#monadic-ucs) surrounded by `⍙`s.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `⎕JSON` converts a JSON document to APL data and a member of a JSON object has a name that is not a valid APL name, the member is renamed using a name mangling algorithm. This results in a name that begins with `⍙`. Any characters that cannot be part of an APL name are replaced with their [decimal Unicode code point](ucs.md#monadic-ucs) surrounded by `⍙`s.
```

[`7162⌶`](../primitive-operators/i-beam/json-translate-name.md) provides direct access to the name mangling algorithm.

> <h3 class="example">Examples</h3>

Reviewer 2: The distinction between the two examples is not obvious. Maybe go with two different example headings with a few explanatory words, for example:

Example: Object member includes non-valid character

In this example, the JSON document describes an object containing two numeric items, one named `a` (which is a valid APL name) and the other named `2a` (which is not a valid APL name):
```json
{"a": 1, "2a": 2}
```

When the object is imported (as a namespace), `⎕JSON` renames `2a` to a valid APL name:
```apl
      (0 ⎕JSON'{"a": 1, "2a": 2}').⎕NL 2
a  
⍙2a
```

When the namespace is exported, `⎕JSON` reverses the mangling:
```apl
      1 ⎕JSON (a:1 ⋄ ⍙2a:2)
{"a":1,"2a":2}
```

This object has a member name with a character (`ý`; `⎕UCS 253`) that is not allowed in APL names:
```json
{"sýn":"vision"}
```

> The `ý` is replaced with `⍙253⍙`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ý` is replaced with `⍙253⍙` ("253" is the Unicode decimal character code for this character):
```

```apl
      (0 ⎕JSON'{"sýn":"vision"}').⎕NL 2
⍙s⍙253⍙n
```
The above name translations are verified using `7162⌶`:
```apl
      0(7162⌶)'2a' 'sýn'
┌───┬────────┐
│⍙2a│⍙s⍙253⍙n│
└───┴────────┘
      1(7162⌶)'⍙2a' '⍙s⍙253⍙n'
┌──┬───┐
│2a│sýn│
└──┴───┘
```

## Variant Options

> `⎕JSON` is controlled by six variant options. The following table summarises each option's effect on import from JSON to APL (`X=0`) and export from APL to JSON (`X=1`). Each option is described in finer detail, with examples, below the table. Variant options specific to one direction are tolerated for the other direction even if they have no effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`⎕JSON` is controlled by six variant options. [](#variant-table) summarises each option's effect on import from JSON to APL (`X=0`) and export from APL to JSON (`X=1`). Each option is described in finer detail, with examples, below the table. Variant options specific to one direction are tolerated for the other direction even if they have no effect.
```

|--------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------:|-----------------------------------------------------|------------------|
| [**`Format`**](#variant-option-format)<br><small>principal</small> | `'D'`<br><small>default</small>       | `R` is APL data corresponding to `Y`                | `Y` is APL data |
|_-                                                                -_| `'M'`                                 | `R` is an APL matrix encoding of `Y`                | `Y` is a 4-column APL matrix as from import with `'M'` |
| [**`Dialect`**](#variant-option-dialect)                           | `'JSON'`<br><small>default</small>    | Only strict JSON syntax is accepted                 | Only strict JSON syntax is produced |
|_-                                                                -_| `'JSON5'`                             | [JSON5](https://json5.org/) extensions are accepted | JSON5 features are used to improve readability and editability, and/or shorten output |

> | [**`Null`**](#variant-option-null)                                 | `⊂'null'`<br><small>default</small>   | JSON `null` becomes APL `⊂'null'`                   | APL `⊂'null'` becomes JSON `null` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [**`Null`**](#variant-option-null)                                 | `⊂'null'`<br><small>default</small>   | JSON <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code> becomes APL `⊂'null'`                   | APL `⊂'null'` becomes JSON <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code> |
```

> |_-                                                                -_| `⎕NULL`                               | JSON `null` becomes APL `⎕NULL`                     | APL `⎕NULL` becomes JSON `null` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|_-                                                                -_| `⎕NULL`                               | JSON <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code> becomes APL `⎕NULL`                     | APL `⎕NULL` becomes JSON <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code> |
```

| [**`Compact`**](#variant-option-compact)                           | `1`<br><small>default</small>         | None                                                | `R` has no whitespace outside quotes |
|_-                                                                -_| `0`                                   | None                                                | `R` has whitespace for readability and, if `Dialect` is `'JSON5'`, trailing commas after final elements and members |

> | [**`Charset`**](#variant-option-charset)                           | `'Unicode'`<br><small>default</small> | None                                                | Unicode characters in `Y` are included verbatim when JSON standard allows |

Reviewer 2: replace verbatim with a non-Latin word...exactly/as written/precisely (or the English alternative of your choice!)

|_-                                                                -_| `'ASCII'`                             | None                                                | Non-ASCII characters are converted to the hexadecimal form `\uNNNN`, and if `Dialect` is `'JSON5'`, also `\xNN` |
| [**`HighRank`**](#variant-option-highrank)                         | `'Error'`<br><small>default</small>   | None                                                | High-rank arrays are rejected |
|_-                                                                -_| `'Split'`                             | None                                                | High-rank arrays are split and [inverted table wrappers](#dataset-wrappers) accept text columns as matrices |

### Variant Option: Format

The `Format` variant option, the principal option, determines whether `⎕JSON` works with a direct APL representation of the data (`'D'` for "Data", the default) or with a four-column matrix that encodes the JSON structure (`'M'` for "Matrix") as nodes with depth, name, value, and type.

#### Import to Data

> If `Format` is `'D'` (which stands for "Data", the default) the JSON document in `Y` is converted to the corresponding APL data `R`, possibly containing sub-arrays and/or sub-namespaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `Format` is `'D'` (which stands for "Data", the default), the JSON document in `Y` is converted to the corresponding APL data `R`, possibly containing sub-arrays and/or sub-namespaces:
```

- JSON arrays are converted into APL vectors.
- JSON objects are converted into APL namespaces.

> - JSON `null` is converted into the specified (or implied) value of [**`Null`**](#variant-option-null) (`⊂'null'`, the default, or `⎕NULL`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- JSON <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code> is converted into the specified (or implied) value of [**`Null`**](#variant-option-null) (`⊂'null'`, the default, or `⎕NULL`).
```

> - JSON `true` and `false` and, if the [**`Dialect`**](#variant-option-dialect) variant option is `'JSON5'`, the JSON5 numeric constants `Infinity`, `-Infinity`, and `NaN`, are converted to enclosed character vectors `⊂'true'`, `⊂'false'`, and so forth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- JSON <code class="language-nonAPL">true</code> and <code class="language-nonAPL">false</code> and, if the [**`Dialect`**](#variant-option-dialect) variant option is `'JSON5'`, the JSON5 numeric constants <code class="language-nonAPL">Infinity</code>, <code class="language-nonAPL">-Infinity</code>, and <code class="language-nonAPL">NaN</code>, are converted to enclosed character vectors `⊂'true'`, `⊂'false'`, and so on.
```

> - If the JSON source contains object member names which are not valid APL names they are converted to APL namespace members with [mangled names](#name-mangling). The original names can be obtained using [`7162⌶`](../primitive-operators/i-beam/json-translate-name.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the JSON source contains object member names that are not valid APL names, they are converted to APL namespace members with [mangled names](#name-mangling). The original names can be obtained using [`7162⌶`](../primitive-operators/i-beam/json-translate-name.md).
```

- If duplicate names are found, the last member encountered is used and all previous members with the same name are discarded.

<h5 class="example">Examples</h5>

> This JSON document (stored as the character vector `json`) is used in the following example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following JSON document is stored as the character vector `json`:
```

Table: Import matrix columns { #import-matrix-table }

| Column  | Contents                         |
|---------|----------------------------------|
| `R[;1]` | Depth                            |
| `R[;2]` | Name (for JSON object members)   |
| `R[;3]` | APL value                        |
| `R[;4]` | [JSON type](#import-types-table) |

The JSON types are as follows:

Table: JSON types { #import-types-table }

| `R[;4]` | `R[;3]` (APL value)                    | Corresponding JSON value |
|---------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| `1`     | Empty (contents are in following rows) | Object                   |
| `2`     | Empty (contents are in following rows) | Array                    |
| `3`     | Number                                 | Number                   |
| `4`     | Character vector                       | String                   |
| `5`     | Specified by `Null` variant            | Null                     |
| `6`     | Enclosed character vector              | Lacking APL equivalent   |

Note that:

> - JSON `null` is converted into the specified (or implied) value of [**`Null`**](#variant-option-null); `⊂'null'` (the default) or `⎕NULL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- JSON <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code> is converted into the specified (or implied) value of [**`Null`**](#variant-option-null); `⊂'null'` (the default) or `⎕NULL`.
```

> - JSON values that lack an APL equivalent, `true` and `false`, and, if `Dialect` is `'JSON5'`, the JSON5 numeric constants `Infinity`, `-Infinity`, and `NaN`, are converted to enclosed character vectors `⊂'true'`, `⊂'false'`, and so forth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- JSON values that lack an APL equivalent, <code class="language-nonAPL">true</code> and <code class="language-nonAPL">false</code>, and, if `Dialect` is `'JSON5'`, the JSON5 numeric constants <code class="language-nonAPL">Infinity</code>, <code class="language-nonAPL">-Infinity</code>, and <code class="language-nonAPL">NaN</code>, are converted to enclosed character vectors `⊂'true'`, `⊂'false'`, and so on.
```

- Object member names are reported as specified in the JSON text; they are not mangled as when `Format` is `'D'`.
- If duplicate names are found, all duplicate members are recorded in the result matrix.

> <h5 class="example">Example</h5>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<h5 class="example">Example</h5>
This example uses the character vector `json` from the previous example:
```

If `Format` is `'M'` (which stands for "Matrix"), the APL array `Y` is converted to a corresponding JSON document `R` and `Y` must be a matrix whose columns are as follows:

Table: Export matrix columns { #export-matrix-table }

| Column  | Contents                        |
|---------|---------------------------------|
| `Y[;1]` | Depth                           |
| `Y[;2]` | Name (for JSON object members)  |
| `Y[;3]` | APL value                       |
| `Y[;4]` | [JSON type](#export-types-table) |

The JSON types are as follows:

Table: JSON types { #export-types-table }

| `Y[;4]` | `Y[;3]` (APL value)       | Corresponding JSON value |
|---------|---------------------------|--------------------------|
| `1`     | Empty array               | Object                   |
| `2`     | Empty array               | Array                    |
| `3`     | Numeric scalar            | Number                   |
| `4`     | Character vector          | String                   |
| `5`     | Null                      | Null                     |
| `6`     | Enclosed character vector | Lacking APL equivalent   |
| `7`     | Enclosed character vector | [Raw text](#raw-text-wrapper) |

> The difference between JSON types `6` and `7` is that `6` only allows the special values that can be imported, while `7` allows any text whatsoever.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The difference between JSON types `6` and `7` is that `7` allows any text but `6` only allows the special values that can be imported.
```

│2│      │300│3│
└─┴──────┴───┴─┘

      1(⎕JSON⍠'Format' 'M')M
DOMAIN ERROR: JSON export: value does not match the specified type in row 3 (⎕IO=1)
      1(⎕JSON⍠'Format' 'M')M
      ∧
```

### Variant Option: Dialect

> If the `Dialect` variant option (default: `'JSON'`) is `'JSON5'`, [JSON5](https://json5.org/) extensions are enabled on import and export: Comments, hexadecimal literals, leading/trailing decimal points, character escapes of the form `\xNN`, trailing commas, unquoted ECMAScript 5.1 identifiers as object member names, single-quoted strings, and `Infinity`/`-Infinity`/`NaN` are accepted and/or produced.

Reviewer: I do not think we should enumerate the differences between JSON and JSON5 - this is not a JSON primer, and we leave definition of the syntax of JSON and JSON5 to their official docs. And this list is incomplete (off the top of my head: numbers can begin with 0; there are more supported single character escape sequences in strings, for example).

├─┼──────┼───┼─┤
│2│      │300│3│
└─┴──────┴───┴─┘
```

> Modifying the above matrix, one number is replaced with an identically looking character vector to illustrate type mismatches:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To illustrate type mismatches, modify the above matrix by replacing one number with a character vector that looks the same:
```

Reviewer: I don't like this proposed change. These are examples, not exercises. Therefore, the text should describe the effect of some change, not invite the reader to do it.

      1(⎕JSON⍠'M')m
      ∧
```

### Variant Option: Dialect

If the `Dialect` variant option (default: `'JSON'`) is `'JSON5'`, [JSON5](https://json5.org/) extensions are enabled on import and export.

On import, all JSON5 extensions are accepted.

On export, the result is shortened by usage of identifiers without quotes, single quotes (`'`), and character escapes `\v` and of the form `\xNN` (for values less than hexadecimal 100, that is, `⎕UCS 256`). If [**`Compact`**](#variant-option-compact) is `0`, a trailing comma (`,`) is added after the last array element and object member.

<h4 class="example">Examples</h4>

```apl
      1 ⎕JSON(a:'é"')
{"a":"é\""}
      1(⎕JSON⍠'Dialect' 'JSON5')(a:'é"')
{a:'é"'}

      1(⎕JSON⍠'Charset' 'ASCII'⍠'Compact' 0)(a:'é"')
{
  "a": "\u00E9\""
}
      1(⎕JSON⍠'Charset' 'ASCII'⍠'Compact' 0⍠'Dialect' 'JSON5')(a:'é"')
{
  a: '\xE9"',
}

      0(⎕JSON⍠'Dialect' 'JSON5')['["a\'
                                  'bc",'
                                  '//:)'
                                  '+.1,'
                                  '/**/'
                                  '0xf]']
┌───┬───┬──┐
│abc│0.1│15│
└───┴───┴──┘
```

### Variant Option: Null

> The `Null` variant option selects how JSON `null` is represented in APL, and must be either `⊂'null'` (the default) or `⎕NULL`. With `Null` being `⊂'null'`, `⎕NULL` causes `DOMAIN ERROR`. With `Null` being `⎕NULL`, `⊂'null'` is still exported as `null` because it is interpreted as [raw text](#raw-text-wrapper).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Null` variant option selects how JSON <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code> is represented in APL, and must be either `⊂'null'` (the default) or `⎕NULL`:

- If `Null` is `⊂'null'`, `⎕NULL` causes `DOMAIN ERROR`.
- If `Null` is `⎕NULL`, `⊂'null'` is still exported as `null` because it is interpreted as [raw text](#raw-text-wrapper).
```

<h4 class="example">Examples</h4>

```apl
      0 ⎕JSON'[null,null]'
┌──────┬──────┐
│┌────┐│┌────┐│
││null│││null││
│└────┘│└────┘│
└──────┴──────┘
      0(⎕JSON⍠'Null'⎕NULL)'[null,null]'
 [Null]  [Null] 

      1 ⎕JSON ⎕NULL ⎕NULL
DOMAIN ERROR: JSON export: item "[1]" of the right argument (⎕IO=1) cannot be converted
      1 ⎕JSON ⎕NULL ⎕NULL
        ∧
      1(⎕JSON⍠'Null'⎕NULL)⎕NULL ⎕NULL
[null,null]
```

### Variant Option: Compact

The `Compact` variant option can be used to generate JSON that is either dense (`1`, the default) or optimised for humans to read and edit (`0`).

> With `Compact` being `0`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `Compact` is `0`:
```

          )
      )
```
Conversion to compact JSON:
```apl
      ⍴json←1 ⎕JSON ns
97
      json
{"a":{"b":["charvec 1","charvec 2"],"c":true,"d":{"e":false,"f⍺":["charvec 3",123,1000.2,null]}}}
```
Non-compact JSON takes more than twice as much space, but is more readable, and easier for humans to edit:
```apl
      ⍴json←1(⎕JSON⍠'Compact' 0)ns
208
      1(⎕JSON⍠'Compact' 0)ns
{
  "a": {
    "b": [
      "charvec 1",
      "charvec 2"
    ],
    "c": true,
    "d": {
      "e": false,
      "f⍺": [
        "charvec 3",
        123,
        1000.2,
        null
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

### Variant Option: Charset

The `Charset` variant option can be used to either allow Unicode in the generated JSON (`'Unicode'`, the default) or restrict the output to ASCII characters (`'ASCII'`). When necessary, characters are converted to the hexadecimal form `\uNNNN`. If [**`Dialect`**](#variant-option-dialect) is `'JSON5'`, the form `\xNN` is used for values up to hexadecimal `FF` (`⎕UCS 255`).

<h4 class="example">Example</h4>

```apl
      ns←(dé:'DÉ')
      ns.dé
DÉ
      1 ⎕JSON ns
{"dé":"DÉ"}
      1(⎕JSON⍠'Charset' 'ASCII')ns
{"d\u00E9":"D\u00C9"}
```

### Variant Option: HighRank

> If `HighRank` is `'Error'` (the default), `⎕JSON` will signal a `DOMAIN ERROR` upon encountering any arrays in `Y` of rank higher than 1. If `HighRank` is `'Split'`, `⎕JSON` will recursively split any such arrays as necessary. This also allows [datasets](#dataset-wrappers) as inverted tables with text columns as matrices.

Reviewer 2: Hard to parse last sentence (I can't suggest a rewrite without understanding it). Do you mean that Y can be an inverted table with text columns as matrices, that the variant option can perform such an inversion, that the result can be presented/transformed in that way, ... please redraft to clarify.

<h4 class="example">Example</h4>

```apl
      d←[[1 2 ⋄ 'AB']['ABC' ⋄ 'DEF']
         (2 3⍴⍳6)    (2 2 2⍴×⍨⍳8)   ]
      d
┌─────┬─────┐
│1 2  │ABC  │
│A B  │DEF  │
├─────┼─────┤
│1 2 3│ 1  4│
│4 5 6│ 9 16│
│     │     │
│     │25 36│
│     │49 64│
└─────┴─────┘

      1 ⎕JSON d
DOMAIN ERROR: JSON export: the right argument cannot be converted (⎕IO=1)
      1 ⎕JSON d
      ∧
      1(⎕JSON⍠'HighRank' 'Split')d
[[[[1,2],"AB"],["ABC","DEF"]],[[[1,2,3],[4,5,6]],[[[1,4],[9,16]],[[25,36],[49,64]]]]]
```

## Wrappers

A wrapper is an enclosed vector with the basic form `⊂code special`. The `code` can be omitted, and index vectors can be appended for data subsetting.

> This structure has been chosen to identify special handling because a nested scalar cannot be represented in JSON or JavaScript. A wrapper can be specified directly in the right argument to `⎕JSON` and/or as part of the data structure specified by the right argument, as a sub-array or in a sub-namespace. This allows a special array to be processed appropriately as part of a general data structure that is to be rendered as JSON.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some APL representations of datasets do not map directly to JSON or JavaScript, for example, nested scalars. A wrapper provides `special` handling if such an APL representation is encountered. It can be declared in the right argument to `⎕JSON` and/or as part of the data structure specified by the right argument, as a sub-array or in a sub-namespace. This allows a `special` array to be processed appropriately as part of a general data structure that is to be rendered as JSON.
```

> The structure of the `special` array is specified within the wrapper by a leading numeric code. Code `1` (the default) allows insertion of raw text, including JSON values such as `null` and `true`. Codes `2`, `3` and `4` identify various representations of a *dataset*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The structure of the `special` array is specified within the wrapper by a leading numeric code. Code `1` (the default) allows insertion of raw text, including JSON values such as <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code> and <code class="language-nonAPL">true</code>. Codes `2`, `3`, and `4` identify various representations of a *dataset*.
```

> The term *dataset* is used here to mean a collection of data, usually presented in tabular form. Each named column (also called a *field*) represents a particular variable. Each row (also called a *record*) corresponds to a given member of the dataset in question, listing its value for each of the variables, such as price and quantity of an item.

Reviewer 2: Add this to end of previous paragraph rather than have it as a separate paragraph.

In APL, a dataset is traditionally represented as a collection of variables:

```apl
      fields←'item' 'price' 'qty'
      item←'Knife' 'Fork' 'Spoon'
      price←3 4 5
      qty←23 45 67
```

However, when a single array is needed, it is commonly represented as either a single mixed-type matrix that includes headers, a mixed-type matrix of values with a separate header vector, or an inverted table of values with a separate header vector.

In JSON, a dataset is almost universally represented as an *array of objects* (JavaScript nomenclature for APL's *vector of namespaces*):

```json
[
  {
    "item": "Knife",
    "price": 3,
    "qty": 23
  },
  {
    "item": "Fork",
    "price": 4,
    "qty": 45
  },
  {
    "item": "Spoon",
    "price": 5,
    "qty": 67
  }
]
```

> Note that the JSON structure can be represented in APL:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The JSON structure can be represented in APL as:
```

```apl
      ⎕←fields{()⎕VSET(↑⍺)⍵}⍤1⍉↑item price qty
 #.[Namespace]  #.[Namespace]  #.[Namespace] 
```

If such a representation is already used in an APL application, then no special handling is necessary to generate the corresponding JSON. However, transforming a dataset into a vector of namespaces, just for export to JSON, is cumbersome and can be expensive. `⎕JSON`'s wrapper codes `2`, `3`, and `4`, provide a quick and efficient way to transform the common APL representations of a dataset directly into a JSON array of objects.

### Raw Text Wrapper

> Special JSON values such as `null`, `true` and `false` do not directly correspond to specific APL values and therefore require special handling. This is provided by wrapper code `1`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Special JSON values such as <code class="language-nonAPL">null</code>, <code class="language-nonAPL">true</code> and <code class="language-nonAPL">false</code> do not directly correspond to specific APL values and, therefore, require special handling. This is provided by wrapper code `1`:
```

```apl
      1 ⎕JSON 42 'text'(⊂1 'null')(⊂1 'true')(⊂1 'false')
[42,"text",null,true,false]
```

> The code number can be omitted:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As `1` is the default code number, it can be omitted:
```

```apl
      1 ⎕JSON 42 'text'(⊂'null')(⊂'true')(⊂'false')
[42,"text",null,true,false]
```

This feature can be used to inject any raw text, although unless it is valid JSON it cannot then be re-imported.

!!! Warning "Warning"

>     Out of convenience, it is common to initialise a list using a scalar rather than a one-element vector. Doing so for an eventual vector of character vectors will fail if the value is exported before a subsequent element is added:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    It is common practice to initialise a list using a scalar rather than a one-element vector. Although this will succeed in generating a vector of character vectors, attempts to add a subsequent element will fail after the value is exported:
```

    ```apl
          list←⊂'foo'
          1 ⎕JSON list
    foo
          1 ⎕JSON list,'bar' 'baz'
    ["foo","bar","baz"]
    ```

>     It is therefore important to initialise as a proper vector:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    It is, therefore, important to convert to a vector before initialising:
```

    ```apl
          list←,⊂'foo'
          1 ⎕JSON list
    ["foo"]
    ```

<h4 class="example">Example</h4>

> The following illustrates how JavaScript objects can be exported; the object contains a JavaScript function which is specified by the contents of an enclosed character vector:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example illustrates how JavaScript objects can be exported; the object contains a JavaScript function that is specified by the contents of an enclosed character vector:
```

      )
      1 ⎕JSON slider
{"max":500,"min":0,"range":true,"slide":function(event,ui){$("#amount").val("$" + ui.values[0] + " - $" + ui.values[1]);},"values":[75,300]}
```

### Dataset Wrappers

Wrapper codes `2`, `3`, and `4` produce identical JSON output (an array of objects; the canonical JSON representation of a dataset), but each allows different APL representation of the dataset:

Table: Wrapper codes { #wrapper-codes-table }

| Wrapper code | Special array                                                                          | Advantage |
|--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| `2`          | Single mixed-type matrix (first row is header vector)                                  | Preserves visual fidelity with a printed table |
| `3`          | Two-element nested vector: value matrix and header vector                              | Allows indexing into the rows and columns of the data |
| `4`          | Two-element nested vector: inverted table (vector of column vectors) and header vector | Less memory and faster lookups |

> For wrapper code `4`, if [**`HighRank`**](#variant-option-highrank) is `'Split'`, character columns can also be stored as character matrices rather than vectors of character vectors, providing even better performance, but note that `⎕JSON` will preserve trailing spaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For wrapper code `4`, if [**`HighRank`**](#variant-option-highrank) is `'Split'`, character columns can also be stored as character matrices rather than vectors of character vectors, providing even better performance, but `⎕JSON` will preserve trailing spaces.
```

```apl
      1(⎕JSON⍠'HighRank' 'Split')singleMatrix
[["item","price","qty"],["Knife",3,23],["Fork",4,45],["Spoon",5,67]]
      1(⎕JSON⍠'HighRank' 'Split')valueMatrix header
[[["Knife",3,23],["Fork",4,45],["Spoon",5,67]],["item","price","qty"]]
      1 ⎕JSON invertedTable header
[[["Knife","Fork","Spoon"],[3,4,5],[23,45,67]],["item","price","qty"]]
      1(⎕JSON⍠'HighRank' 'Split')invertedTable2 header
[[["Knife","Fork ","Spoon"],[3,4,5],[23,45,67]],["item","price","qty"]]
```

### Selection of a Subset

A subset of a dataset's records (rows) and fields (columns) can be selected, with each subset being specified as a vector of strictly ascending indices and `⊂⍬` meaning "all" records (and/or fields):

Table: Wrappers forms for selecting dataset subsets { #subset-table }

| Subset             | Wrapper form                               |
|--------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| records            | `⊂code special recordIndices`              |
| fields             | `⊂code special(⊂⍬)fieldIndices`            |
| records and fields | `⊂code special recordIndices fieldIndices` |

> <h4 class="example">Examples</h4>

Reviewer 2: In these examples, is there a reason why "item" and "qty" are in APL font but "Fork" is shown in normal text font? If so, ignore this (but please explain it to me!)...if not, please make them all APL font.

> The following example selects the second record (Fork):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To select the second record (Fork):
```

```apl
      1 ⎕JSON⊂4(invertedTable header)2
[{"item":"Fork","price":4,"qty":45}]
```

> The following example selects the first and third fields (`item` and `qty`):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To select the first and third fields (`item` and `qty`):
```

```apl
      1 ⎕JSON⊂4(invertedTable header)(⊂⍬)(1 3)
[{"item":"Knife","qty":23},{"item":"Fork","qty":45},{"item":"Spoon","qty":67}]
```

> The following example selects the second record (Fork) and the first and third fields (`item` and `qty`):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To select the second record (Fork) and the first and third fields (`item` and `qty`):
```
